Intro clarity edits (#123)
myyoda/principles-paper: main.tex

We adopt the term \textbf{research object} to denote a collection of data, code, and metadata that together represent the research as a complete unit.
It is common for the components of a research object to be organized independently with code in one repository, data on a shared drive, environment setup in a wiki page, provenance in a lab notebook or nowhere at all.
This separation undermines rigor, reproducibility, reusability, and efficiency.
Even when its components are gathered in one place, a research object is often tightly coupled to specific environments, opaque to outside collaborators, and difficult to reuse or redistribute.

The FAIR principles\cite{wilkinson_fair_2016} and FAIR4RS guidelines\cite{barker_introducing_2022} provide structured guidance for making digital objects "Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable".
The Workflow Community Initiative (WCI-FW)\cite{wilkinson_applying_2025} mapped these principles onto computational workflows but explicitly chose not to define new ones, instead treating workflows as hybrid data/software objects.

> The Workflow Community Initiative (WCI-FW)\cite{wilkinson_applying_2025} mapped these principles onto computational workflows but explicitly chose not to define new ones, instead treating workflows as hybrid data \& software objects.

Reviewer: some kind of collision in suggestions i guess, this is doubled now. 
```suggestion
The Workflow Community Initiative (WCI-FW)\cite{wilkinson_applying_2025} mapped these principles onto computational workflows but explicitly chose not to define new ones, instead treating workflows as hybrid data \& software objects.
```

We adopt the term \textbf{research object} to denote a collection of data, code, and metadata that together represent the research as a complete unit.
It is common for the components of a research object to be organized independently with code in one repository, data on a shared drive, environment setup in a wiki page, provenance in a lab notebook or nowhere at all.
This separation undermines rigor, reproducibility, reusability, and efficiency.
Even when its components are gathered in one place, a research object is often tightly coupled to specific environments, opaque to outside collaborators, and difficult to reuse or redistribute.

> The FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable)\cite{wilkinson_fair_2016} provide structured guidance for digital objects, and the FAIR4RS guidelines\cite{barker_introducing_2022} extend these principles to research software.

Reviewer 2: Without defining digital objects as distinct from software this doesn't make anything clearer

I think the original wording was shorter and still gets the point across; we need to be careful while revising to emphasize brevity, otherwise the length of this manuscript (already long) will grow too much

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The FAIR principles\cite{wilkinson_fair_2016} and FAIR4RS guidelines\cite{barker_introducing_2022} provide structured guidance for making digital objects "Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable".
The Workflow Community Initiative (WCI-FW)\cite{wilkinson_applying_2025} mapped these principles onto computational workflows but explicitly chose not to define new ones, instead treating workflows as hybrid data/software objects.
```

Author: The problem with the originally wording is that the FAIR principles are not clearly defined. One can only guess what they are by matching the first letter of the adjectives ending in line 39.

Additionally, line 40 uses "these principles" to refer to the FAIR principles. However, the reference is a bit hard to decode since with the original wording of line 39 only has the FAIR principles as one of two that makes digital object adhere to a set of properties that seemingly to be the FAIR principles.

Reviewer 2: I think the original wording has no problems

Author: > I think the original wording was shorter and still gets the point across; we need to be careful while revising to emphasize brevity, otherwise the length of this manuscript (already long) will grow too much

The proposed version of the introduction section is indeed longer. It now has 461 words. The original introduction section has 416 words.

Reviewer: I think the original is clearer on this one.

> The Workflow Community Initiative (WCI-FW)\cite{wilkinson_applying_2025} mapped these principles onto computational workflows but explicitly chose not to define new ones, instead treating workflows as hybrid data and software objects.

Reviewer 2: Here, though it may look odd at first glance, I think the slash is closer to our intended meaning. The more 'syntactically proper' "and" can lead to a misreading of the two as being separate statements

Maybe the ampersand is an in-between?

```suggestion
The Workflow Community Initiative (WCI-FW)\cite{wilkinson_applying_2025} mapped these principles onto computational workflows but explicitly chose not to define new ones, instead treating workflows as hybrid data \& software objects.
```

Author: I defer to you for the intended meaning. The current wording is "as hybrid \& and software objects". Is that you intended? There may have been a typo there.

Reviewer 3: hybrid as consisting of both software and data. I think `&` would indeed clarify that it is intended for this conjoint use.  Let's take it

Yet the community lacks a shared vocabulary for referring to these ideas, evaluating how thoroughly they are applied, and communicating that evaluation to collaborators and reviewers.
Here we provide that vocabulary: the STAMPED properties (Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable), originating from the YODA Principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018}, which describe the operational maturity of a research object.
Rather than a compliance threshold, each STAMPED property is a spectrum from a practical minimum---often what researchers are already doing---to an aspirational ideal.
A researcher who stores everything under one project directory, version-controls analysis scripts, and documents how to run them is already meeting the practical minimum for Self-containment, Tracking, and Actionability.
As complexity grows, such as for multi-institutional collaborations with heterogeneous workflows spanning platforms enforcing long-term reproducibility, these same properties guide researchers toward more rigorous practices without requiring wholesale adoption of new tools.

> STAMPED provides a vocabulary for describing and a framework for evaluating and incrementally improving the operational properties of research objects toward enhanced rigor, reproducibility, reusability, and efficiency.

Reviewer 2: Altogether dropping this line about rigor?

Author: Are you talking about the original line 51?

If yes, my answer is yes. That line says nothing new, and it doesn't flow smoothly from the earlier part of the paragraph.

Reviewer 2: We need to keep the key phrases of rigor and efficiency; please propose a separate rephrasing

Author: I don't have any idea to rephrase it. I just think it is repeating too much of what is already said this short introduction.
 
 Another person can break the tie to to keep it.

Reviewer 2: "Rigor" is only mentioned one other place in the intro and is a key word to use (https://grants.nih.gov/policy-and-compliance/policy-topics/reproducibility/guidance)

"Efficiency" occurs no where else in the intro

Author: > "Efficiency" occurs no where else in the intro

It is mentioned in https://github.com/stamped-principles/stamped-paper/blob/2c1cfe0267f6d400a88d1de5241d0d423e6c39ce/main.tex#L36

Author: It has been done. The last sentence has been reattached.

Author: > "Rigor" is only mentioned one other place in the intro and is a key word to use (https://grants.nih.gov/policy-and-compliance/policy-topics/reproducibility/guidance)

https://github.com/stamped-principles/stamped-paper/blob/2c1cfe0267f6d400a88d1de5241d0d423e6c39ce/main.tex#L36

https://github.com/stamped-principles/stamped-paper/blob/2c1cfe0267f6d400a88d1de5241d0d423e6c39ce/main.tex#L51

> For example, persistent identifiers serve both Findability and the ability to track components over time, but accent different aspects: FAIR emphasizes discovery and interoperability across repositories, while STAMPED emphasizes improving the operational maturity of scientific workflows in day-to-day research practice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, persistent identifiers serve both Findability and Tracking, but accent different aspects: FAIR emphasizes discovery and interoperability across repositories, while STAMPED emphasizes improving the operational maturity of scientific workflows in day-to-day research practice.
```

Revert: the original version makes clear the link between principles by name.

Author: I used "both the FAIR and STAMPED frameworks" instead of "both frameworks" because this is the first time the word "frameworks" appear in the manuscript.

Without the names of "FAIR and STAMPED", a reader can question which frameworks we are talking about. 

Are they FAIR principles, FAIR4RS guidelines, Workflow Community Initiative, or STAMPED?

Reviewer 2: @candleindark That is not the line this comment is about, look at where the suggestion starts

Author: > @candleindark That is not the line this comment is about, look at where the suggestion starts

Thanks for pointing that out.

The issue I have with using "Tracking" here is that it is not yet named/defined at this point in the manuscript, unlike "Findability" which has been named as one of the four FAIR principles if the suggested change earlier is adopted.

Reviewer 2: It is named at https://github.com/stamped-principles/stamped-paper/pull/123/changes#diff-f67098301b6788c19af2853a0e5ad776fda05572b1b1224df46c42d1ad323cbbL47, and as a word its meaning is clear without knowing that it couples with Git

I.e., foreshadowing

Reviewer 3: I like proposed in PR simplification but it removed one IMHO important aspect -- that it is not required to adopt all of them at once.  Would be nice to get it back in somehow.

I also @CodyCBakerPhD 's suggested explicit use of `Tracking`

> Many researchers already employ practices that address these operational properties, such as using version control, adopting containerized environments, organizing structured project directories, and documenting analysis steps. % TODO: It is unclear what the operational properties are at this point, so it can be confusing to the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many researchers already employ practices that address these operational properties, such as version control, containerized environments, structured project directories, and documented analysis steps.
```

I prefer the cadence of the original sentence where it starts off framing in the past tense of what has been done, following the next line which shifts to what 'to do'

Author: As noted in the commit message, the original sentence suffer the problem of mis-categorizing version control, containerized environments, and structured project directories as practices. We can stretch and call version control as a practice, but it very difficult to call containerized environments and structured project directories as practices. Adding the verbs make each one of those into a practice though the wording is not perfect, but it's not as problematic as the original.

Reviewer 2: Every single one of those things is a general practice that people can and do use.

Author: I think the change I am proposing is based on something very subtle. As to your point,
 
 > Every single one of those things is a general practice that people can and do use.
 
 I don't think one can practice containerized environments or structured project directories. One can however practice adopting containerized environments and organizing structured project directories.

I will defer to another reviewer to break to tie.

Reviewer: I think for this one, the comment is correct, its unclear by "operational properties" whether we are talking about "how a research object should be organized and managed so it can actually be re-executed, extended, and redistributed" of if we are forward-referencing the STAMPED principles (which are not yet named). 

I vote that we  avoid the grammar issue, keep the sentence as-is, add the comment, and come back to the wording when we address the conceptual issue.

```suggestion
Many researchers already employ practices that address these operational properties, such as version control, containerized environments, structured project directories, and documented analysis steps. % TODO: It is unclear what the operational properties are at this point, so it can be confusing to the user.
```

> Here we provide that vocabulary: the STAMPED properties (Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable), derived from the YODA Principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we provide that vocabulary: the STAMPED principles (Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable), originating from the YODA principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018}.
```

IMO originating is a better word; derivatives usually don't inject or expand beyond what is in the source, but we do (via integration against VAMP)

Author: Sure. "Derived" may be too narrow. My concern about "originating" is that it is too broad. It merely points out that STAMPED comes from YODA but not how.

Since STAMPED has a of VAMP as well. Why not mention it here as well? It is rather uneven by just mentioning YODA since VAMP plays a significant role in the conception of STAMPED.

What about

```suggestion
Here we provide that vocabulary: the STAMPED properties (Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable), building on the YODA Principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018} and later the VAMP formulation\cite{hanke_what_2023}.
```

As for change from "STAMPED properties" to "STAMPED principles", I think you need to do it in another PR since "STAMPED properties" are used in the entire manuscript, not just the introduction. Here, let's stay consistent with the rest of the manuscript for now.

Reviewer 2: Cool, more work for me :) thanks

Author: "STAMPED properties" is now replaced by "STAMPED principles" in the entire document via https://github.com/stamped-principles/stamped-paper/pull/125.

> Each STAMPED property is conceived as a spectrum from a practical baseline, reflecting common existing practices, to an aspirational ideal of fully realized operational maturity, rather than a binary notion of compliance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each STAMPED principle is conceived as a spectrum from a practical baseline, reflecting common existing practices, to an aspirational ideal of fully realized operational maturity, rather than a binary notion of compliance.
```

I guess we are now going all in on 'principles' not properties

Something to think about is how this statement may coflict with the checklist and RFC2119 requirements, which do reduce down to binary notions of compliance

Author: "STAMPED properties" was the original wording and used throughout the manuscript. If that change is to be done, it should be done in the entire article.

This is not related to this PR.

Reviewer 2: Sure, sure did you want to take that on?

Author: Is it agreed on? 

@asmacdo @yarikoptic "STAMPED principles" instead of "STAMPED properties"?

I can go with either but lean toward "STAMPED properties" since they are more like properties to me though. However, "STAMPED principles" would be more of a parallel to FAIR principles.

Reviewer 2: It is the name of the GitHub organization and website.

Author: "STAMPED properties" is now replaced by "STAMPED principles" in the entire document via https://github.com/stamped-principles/stamped-paper/pull/125.

> As complexity increases, such as in multi-institutional collaborations with heterogeneous workflows, these properties guide the transition toward more rigorous, reproducible practices without requiring wholesale adoption of new tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As complexity increases, such as in multi-institutional collaborations with heterogeneous workflows, these properties guide the transition toward more rigorous, reproducible practices without requiring wholesale adoption of new tools.
STAMPED provides a vocabulary for describing and a framework for evaluating and incrementally improving the operational properties of research objects toward enhanced rigor, reproducibility, reusability, and efficiency.
```

> At the practical baseline, a research object that has all components under one project directory, includes version-controlled analysis scripts, and contains documentation on how to run them meets the requirements for Self-containment, Tracking, and Actionability.

Reviewer 2: The original line was

> A researcher who stores everything under one project directory, version-controls analysis scripts, and documents how to run them is already meeting the practical minimum for Self-containment, Tracking, and Actionability.

Something to think about: is it better to focus on the person/individual/researcher instead of the neutral research object?

Is it a better argument to convince people by placing the frame within their shoes?

Author: Sure it is better to focus on the person, but original sentence is problematic in the following sense as indicated in the commit message:

STAMPED qualifies a research object not a person.

Reviewer 2: This relates to how we now refer to these as 'principles' to be followed [by a person], not properties [of an object], which I think is more relatable and less prescriptive as a whole

Author: I don't think changing from "properties" to "principles" will allows STAMPED to qualify a person instead of a research object.

In the original wording:

"Yet the community lacks a shared vocabulary for referring to these ideas, evaluating how thoroughly they are applied, and communicating that evaluation to collaborators and reviewers.
Here we provide that vocabulary: the STAMPED properties (Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable), originating from the YODA Principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018}, which describe the operational maturity of a research object."

In the proposed wording (I tried my best not to change the intended meaning):

"Yet the research community lacks a shared vocabulary for referring to these practices, evaluating how thoroughly they are applied, and communicating the evaluation to collaborators and reviewers.
Here we provide that vocabulary: the STAMPED properties (Self-contained, Tracked, Actionable, Modular, Portable, Ephemeral, and Distributable), derived from the YODA Principles\cite{hanke_yoda_2018}.
The STAMPED properties provide a framework for evaluating how thoroughly these practices are applied and thus the operational maturity of a research object."

In both versions, STAMPED is not for qualifying a person.

It is fine to put some focus on the person not the research object if you find the proposed change too impersonal but I would suggest against the original since it is wrong. On the other hand, I think focusing on the neutral research object isn't too bad at all since this is a technical paper after all. Focusing research object also  reconnect with the earlier part of the introduction.

Reviewer 2: It is not the person who is being qualified, it is their practices. People _have_ principles which they live by.

Author: The original sentence reads

"A researcher ... is ready meeting ... practical minimum Self-containment, Tracking, and Actionability."

That's using the STAMPED to qualify the researcher to me.

However, I am just making suggestions in this PR. If you feel very strongly to revet back. I'm OK with it.

Reviewer: This chunk needs resolution on principles/properties etc. If you want to keep the change to line 47, thats cool, but for the rest, I think we should come back after #125

Author: I reverted line 47 to 50.

I agree with @CodyCBakerPhD "originating" is better than "derived", so let that line back to the original.

However, you may want to provide more information later since "originating" is rather broad.
